docs: Add `tedge-p11-server` reference and update `hsm-support.md` (#3597)
thin-edge/thin-edge.io: docs/src/references/hsm-support.md

```

```sh command="tedge config list --doc key_uri" title="tedge config list --doc key_uri"
```

## Setup guide
<!-- split the guide into a separate page under "Operate Devices" category? -->
<!-- also would be nice to write a test for this guide -->

The following guide shows how to connect to Cumulocity using a PKCS #11 cryptographic token. Instead
of using a dedicated hardware token, we'll create a software token using
[SoftHSM2](https://github.com/softhsm/softHSMv2) and import currently used private key on it.

:::note

While this guide uses SoftHSM2 to demonstrate the feature, be aware that in a real production
setting you'll probably be using a different, hardware token. The process of setting up the token
itself may be different for each token type, as well as require using a different PKCS #11 dynamic
library, but in all cases, the goal is to:

- store the private key on the HSM
- store the corresponding certificate on the file system
- set `device.cert_path` to the certificate path
- set `device.cryptoki.module_path` to the correct PKCS #11 dynamic library
- set `device.cryptoki.pin` and `device.cryptoki.uri` accordingly to the local HSM settings

:::

> ### Part 1: Setup the cryptographic token

Reviewer: For consistency with other pages, can you change to use "Step" instead of "Part" (for all three steps)?

```suggestion
### Step 1: Setup the cryptographic token
```

Author: fixed in 8a5180c3d4

   and manage SoftHSM tokens. After adding your own user, remember to logout and login for changes
   to take effect. Alternatively, you can just run `softhsm2-util` and `p11tool` with `sudo`.

   ```sh
    sudo usermod -a -G softhsm tedge
    sudo usermod -a -G softhsm $(id -un)
   ```

3. Create a new SoftHSM token. You'll be prompted for a PIN for a regular user and security officer
   (SO). The rest of the guide assumes PIN=123456, but you're free to use a different one.

    ```sh
    softhsm2-util --init-token --slot 0 --label my-token
    ```

4. Import the private key to the created token. Make sure to use the correct PIN value for a regular
   user from the previous step.

    ```sh
    PUB_PRIV_KEY=$(
        cat "$(tedge config get device.key_path)" && cat "$(tedge config get device.cert_path)"
    )
    softhsm2-util \
        --import <(echo "$PUB_PRIV_KEY") \
        --token my-token \
        --label my-key \
        --id 01 \
        --pin 123456 \
    ```

5. Get the URI of the key

    First, see what tokens are available

    ```sh
    p11tool --list-tokens
    ```

>     ```sh title="p11tool --list-tokens"

Reviewer: I'd recommend just to show the output...the command generating the output is already provided immediately above it.

````suggestion
    ```sh title="Output"
````

Author: fixed in 3eebdb3945

    ...
    Token 2:
        URL: pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token
        Label: my-token
        Type: Generic token
        Flags: RNG, Requires login
        Manufacturer: SoftHSM project
        Model: SoftHSM v2
        Serial: 83f9cf49039c051a
        Module: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/softhsm/libsofthsm2.so
    ...
    ```

    Now check if the private key object is in the token. You may need to login, provide the regular
    user PIN and also provide token URL(URI) if multiple tokens are connected:

    ```sh
    sudo p11tool --login --set-pin=123456 --list-privkeys "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token"
    ```

>     ```sh title="sudo p11tool --login --set-pin=123456 --list-privkeys "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token""

Reviewer: I'm pretty sure the title was broken anyway due to the nested double quotes...but easier just to use "Output" as the title.

````suggestion
    ```sh title="Output"
````

Author: fixed in 3eebdb3945

    Object 0:
        URL: pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token;id=%01;object=my-key;type=private
        Type: Private key (EC/ECDSA-SECP256R1)
        Label: my-key
        Flags: CKA_PRIVATE; CKA_SENSITIVE; 
        ID: 01
    ```

### Part 2: thin-edge setup

Next, we're going to configure `tedge` to use the token directly using module mode.

If that mode doesn't work for you, because of the token can't be accessed for some reason or you
can't dynamically load the PKCS #11 library, see how to [use `tedge-p11-server`](./tedge-p11-server.md).

Using the module mode, the cryptoki module will be loaded by the dynamic loader
and used for signing. If there are many tokens or private keys we also need to
provide the URI for the key to select a correct one.

6. Enable the module mode and set the module and the key URI.
```sh
tedge config set device.cryptoki.mode module
tedge config set device.cryptoki.module_path /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/softhsm/libsofthsm2.so

> tedge config set device.key_uri "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token;id=%01;object=my-key;type=private"

Reviewer: The numbering should start from 1 for each section (since it is the numbering (otherwise it can be easy to mess up the numbering across sections in future edits).

Also for individual numbered items, the contents should be indented under the numbered item, Step 1 is ok, but Step 2 and 3 need to be indented for the contents of each numbered item.

Author: fixed in 8a5180c3d4

```

:::note

`[cloud].device.key_uri` config setting corresponds to the usual `[cloud].device.key_path` setting,
but instead of pointing to the private key file, it contains the URI for a given cloud.

:::

### Part 3: Reconnect

> 7. Enable the builtin bridge. PKCS #11 doesn't work when using mosquitto as a bridge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Enable the built-in bridge. PKCS #11 doesn't work when using mosquitto as a bridge.
```

Author: fixed in 8a5180c3d4

---
title: Hardware Security Module (HSM)
tags: [Reference, Security]
description: Current state of HSM support in %%te%%.
---

> %%te%% supports HSM using [PKCS #11][1] (_aka_ cryptoki) cryptographic tokens for MQTT client

Author: removed the link in 8fc4a62b3e

I think initially I wanted to link the spec here, but I don't think it would be helpful to any user, and given there's no other PKCS11 to differentiate from, it should be obvious without additional links.

authentication between the device and the cloud.

With this feature, %%te%% uses an Hardware Security Module (HSM) to store the private key of the
device, preventing this key to be stolen. Device authentication is then delegated by %%te%% to the
module using the `PKCS#11` protocol when a TLS connection is established.  

When running `tedge connect` or `tedge reconnect` command, as part of a TLS handshake with the

> remote MQTT broker, a confirmation of an ownership of the certificate by the client is required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
remote MQTT broker, a proof of ownership of the device certificate is required.
```

Author: suggestion applied in 8fc4a62b3e

itself may be different for each token type, as well as require using a different PKCS #11 dynamic
library, but in all cases, the goal is to:

- store the private key on the HSM
- store the corresponding certificate on the file system
- set `device.cert_path` to the certificate path
- set `device.cryptoki.module_path` to the correct PKCS #11 dynamic library
- set `device.cryptoki.pin` and `device.cryptoki.uri` accordingly to the local HSM settings

:::

### Part 1: Setup the cryptographic token

1. Install SoftHSM2 (to create the token and key) and `p11tool` (to view the [PKCS #11 URI][p11uri]
   of the key).

    ```sh
    sudo apt-get install -y softhsm2 gnutls-bin
    ```

    [p11uri]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7512

For SoftHSM configuration, see [SoftHSM README](https://github.com/softhsm/softHSMv2?tab=readme-ov-file#configure-1).

2. Add tedge and current user to `softhsm` group. Only users belonging to `softhsm` group can view
   and manage SoftHSM tokens. After adding your own user, remember to logout and login for changes
   to take effect. Alternatively, you can just run `softhsm2-util` and `p11tool` with `sudo`.

   ```sh
    sudo usermod -a -G softhsm tedge

>     sudo usermod -a -G softhsm $()

Reviewer 2: What is this `$()` variable? Do you mean `$(id -un)`?

Author: fixed in 8fc4a62b3e

        Model: SoftHSM v2
        Serial: 83f9cf49039c051a
        Module: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/softhsm/libsofthsm2.so
    ...
    ```

    Now check if the private key object is in the token. You may need to login, provide the regular
    user PIN and also provide token URL(URI) if multiple tokens are connected:

    ```sh
    sudo p11tool --login --set-pin=123456 --list-privkeys "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token"
    ```
    ```sh title="sudo p11tool --login --set-pin=123456 --list-privkeys "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token""
    Object 0:
        URL: pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token;id=%01;object=my-key;type=private
        Type: Private key (EC/ECDSA-SECP256R1)
        Label: my-key
        Flags: CKA_PRIVATE; CKA_SENSITIVE; 
        ID: 01
    ```

### Part 2: thin-edge setup

Next, we're going to configure `tedge` to use the token directly using module mode.

If that mode doesn't work for you, because of the token can't be accessed for some reason or you

> can't dynamically load the PKCS #11 library, see how to [use `tedge-p11-server`](./tedge-p11-server.md).

Reviewer 2: The link is broken

```suggestion
can't dynamically load the PKCS #11 library, see how to [use `tedge-p11-server`](../tedge-p11-server).
```

Author: weird, the link isn't broken for me; the current form `./tedge-p11-server.md` both works when the server is started by `just docs` and is recommended by vscode.

Reviewer 2: Indeed, it works with no changes. Did I test it while the referenced page was still marked as draft (in which case the link is not valid)?

<!-- TODO: put instructions for tp11s in its dedicated page -->

Using the module mode, the cryptoki module will be loaded by the dynamic loader
and used for signing. If there are many tokens or private keys we also need to
provide the URI for the key to select a correct one.

> 5. Enable the module mode and set the module and the key URI.

Reviewer 2: Numbering is weird: there is already a 5th point in the previous section.

Author: fixed in 8fc4a62b3e

Indeed there was a duplicate step 3 that I missed, should be no duplicate step numbers now.

```sh
tedge config set device.cryptoki.mode module
tedge config set device.cryptoki.module_path /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/softhsm/libsofthsm2.so
# optional if there are many tokens/keys

> tedge config set device.key_uri "pkcs11:model=SoftHSM%20v2;manufacturer=SoftHSM%20project;serial=83f9cf49039c051a;token=my-token;id=%01;object=my-key;type=private"

Reviewer 2: Is this correct? Shouldn't this be the contrary i.e that `device.key_uri` is optional when there is *only one* key?

Author: comment removed in 8fc4a62b3e

Decided that since we talk about key selection in its section, it's better to mention it there than add comments here.
And indeed the comment was wrong, the setting is effectively optional only if there is 1 token and 1 key.

        cloud host: thin-edge-io.eu-latest.cumulocity.com:8883
        auth type: Certificate
        certificate file: /etc/tedge/device-certs/rsa/tedge-certificate.pem
        cryptoki: true
        bridge: built-in
        service manager: systemd
        mosquitto version: 2.0.20
        proxy: Not configured
Creating device in Cumulocity cloud... ✓
Restarting mosquitto... ✓
Waiting for mosquitto to be listening for connections... ✓
Enabling tedge-mapper-c8y... ✓
Verifying device is connected to cloud... ✓
Checking Cumulocity is connected to intended tenant... ✓
Enabling tedge-agent... ✓
```

`cryptoki: true` in the connection summary confirms that we connected using our PKCS #11 token.

## Key selection

<!-- at the moment this isn't tested very extensively -->

`tedge` or `tedge-p11-server` will try to find a private key even if the URI is not provided. In
cases where there are multiple tokens/keys to choose from, the first one returned by the system will
be automatically selected, but appropriate warning will be emitted:

```
WARN tedge_p11_server::pkcs11: Multiple keys were found. If the wrong one was chosen, please use a URI that uniquely identifies a key.
```

> In such cases, it may be necessary to specify a key.

Reviewer 2: How can I do that?

Author: added the name of the setting in 8fc4a62b3e

draft: true
---

> %%te%% supports using [PKCS #11][1] (_aka_ cryptoki) cryptographic tokens for MQTT client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
%%te%% supports HSM using [PKCS #11][1] (_aka_ cryptoki) cryptographic tokens for MQTT client
```

authentication between the device and the cloud.

> On the %%te%% side, we use the private key on the module to sign necessary messages to establish a

Reviewer 2: What is said is correct but I miss some stronger structure: 1) context 2) purpose 2) restrictions

```
With this feature, %%te%% uses an Hardware Security Module (HSM) to store the private key of the device, 
preventing this key to be stolen. Device authentication is then delegated by %%te%% to the module
using the `PKCS#11` protocol when a TLS connection is established.

Any HSM which has a `PKCS#11` interface are supported, some examples of such modules are:

* USB based devices like NitroKey HSM 2, Yubikey 5
* TPM 2.0 (Trusted Platform Module)
* ARM TrustZone (via OP-TEE)

For now, HSM is only used for the TLS MQTT connection between the device and C8y cloud.
Additionally, the built-in bridge has to be used and the user has to device certificate corresponds to private key stored in the HSM (a step that depends on the actual key).
```

Author: fixed in 5eaf881bc56b35d95695649d61027be0cb3f74ec

This feature has the following related configuration options:

> ```sh command="tedge config list --doc device.cryptoki" title="tedge config list --doc device.cryptoki"

Author: fixed in b0177caaf19818548178b1a05a27b53e56294fda

```

```sh command="tedge config list --doc key_uri" title="tedge config list --doc key_uri"
```

## Setup guide
<!-- split the guide into a separate page under "Operate Devices" category? -->
<!-- maybe it would be better to use SoftHSM2 instead of a Yubikey so everyone can follow? -->
<!-- also would be nice to write a test for this guide -->

The following guide shows how to connect to Cumulocity using a PKCS #11 cryptographic token. Instead
of using a dedicated hardware token, we'll create a software token using

> [SoftHSM2](https://github.com/softhsm/softHSMv2) and import currently used private key on it.

Author: fixed in 5eaf881bc56b35d95695649d61027be0cb3f74ec

   from the previous step.

    ```sh
    PUB_PRIV_KEY=$(
        cat "$(tedge config get device.key_path)" && cat "$(tedge config get device.cert_path)"
    )
    softhsm2-util \
        --import <(echo "$PUB_PRIV_KEY") \
        --token my-token \
        --label my-key \
        --id 01 \
        --pin 123456 \
    ```

### Part 2: thin-edge setup

Next, we need to make sure the token is accessible by %%te%%. This can be tricky because of different permissions or if
%%te%% is inside of a container.

So we're going to check if we can use the module directly and do it if so. If not, we're going to
use [`tedge-p11-server`](./tedge-p11-server.md).

5. Install `p11tool`

    ```sh
    apt-get install -y gnutls-bin
    ```

6. Check if SoftHSM2 key object is visible using the module

    <!-- if one needs root to interact with softhsm tokens, running tedge-p11-server as root would
    make them available to tedge, but runing the server as root seems a bad idea and we probably
    shouldn't recommend it-->
    > NOTE: It may be necessary to have root permissions to view SoftHSM tokens. If so, `tedge` user also won't be able

>     > to access them.

Author: fixed in 5eaf881bc56b35d95695649d61027be0cb3f74ec

Instead of having this awkward split into `module` and `socket` parts on this page, decided to go just with a single `module` mode. Additionally I found that adding to `softhsm` group gives necessary permissions, and with that I've been able to simplify the guide and reduce the number of steps required.

This feature has the following related configuration options:

```sh command="tedge config list --doc device.cryptoki" title="tedge config list --doc device.cryptoki"
```

```sh command="tedge config list --doc key_uri" title="tedge config list --doc key_uri"
```

## Setup guide
<!-- split the guide into a separate page under "Operate Devices" category? -->
<!-- maybe it would be better to use SoftHSM2 instead of a Yubikey so everyone can follow? -->
<!-- also would be nice to write a test for this guide -->

The following guide shows how to connect to Cumulocity using a PIV-capable Yubikey. The guide uses a
Yubikey 5C NFC.

### Part 1: Setup the cryptographic token

1. Make sure the Yubikey is connected.
<!--is it possible to use a generic p11 client to setup the token instead of a yubikey-specific client?-->
2. Install the [ykman CLI](https://docs.yubico.com/software/yubikey/tools/ykman/).
3. Create a private key on the device. In the guide we'll import the private key, but you can also
   create one directly on the Yubikey to ensure its contents are not exposed.

    ```sh
    ykman piv keys import 9a $(tedge config get device.key_path)

>     ```

Reviewer: Since most of these commands are Yubikey specific we might need to reorganize the docs (or maybe pick a different token by default which is more pkcs11 compliant, like Nitrokey HSM 2)

Author: The best would probably be to use SoftHSM2, so everyone can follow the instructions.

Author: changed in 22324daa
